---
categories:
  - Tutorial
  - Implementation
  - Security
date: "2022-01-05T00:00:00Z"
title: How to use HTTPS on localhost
slug: "localhost-https"
---

Sometimes you want to have your application running on HTTPS even when testing it out locally. One common approach is to use a self-signed certificate, but this method has some pitfalls - most notably that any browser will frown upon your certificate and start shouting that it is insecure. A more robust approach is to use a certificate generated by a Certificate Authority (CA). How? Enter [mkcert](https://github.com/FiloSottile/mkcert), which lets you act as your own CA. Using it is very straightforward.

## Preparations

First you need to install mkcert itself. Do so using homebrew, or otherwise follow the [instructions](https://github.com/FiloSottile/mkcert#installation).

    brew install mkcert

Additionally install [nss](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Projects/NSS) if you are using Firefox:

    brew install nss

Now we can create our very own CA!

    mkcert -install

You might need to restart your browser for its trust store to include your new CA.

## Certificate generation

Finally we are ready to generate our actual certificate:

    mkcert localhost

Or, if you want to control where the naming and storage path of the certificate files:

    mkcert -key-file certs/localhost-key.pem -cert-file certs/localhost.pem localhost

And we're done! All that's left is to tell your application to launch using HTTPS, and where to find its certificate.

## Vue example

Here's a quick example of how to make your Vue.js application run using HTTPS.
Add the following snippet to your `vue.config.js` file:

```
const fs = require("fs");

module.exports = {
  
  ...

  devServer: {
    https: {
      key: fs.readFileSync('./certs/localhost-key.pem'),
      cert: fs.readFileSync('./certs/localhost.pem')
    }
  }
};
```

That's it! Enjoy using your app over HTTPS without trust warnings in the browser.
